Can you just give me your full name, doctor, just so we can have it on the tape?
My name is Henry Bernard Blumberg.
Okay.
And you live in St.
Paul.
Can I ask you a question before we get going?
Some of the court papers have Stephen's name, S-T-E-V-E-N, or S-T-E-P-H-E-N.
That's just a mistake on that part.
Okay.
I'm sorry.
So you were going to start talking and saying something?
Okay.
Stephen is not a family name, incidentally, but his middle name, which is C-A-R-Y, was after my mother, whose name was C-A-R-R-I-E.
And I have a very interesting family.
My grandpa, who was born in Davenport, Iowa in 1967, was an old-fashioned horse trader.
And when I was a little boy, we lived with him.
And Grandpa was a well-known character in the Twin Cities.
And he actually is the father figure for our entire group and we do.
I spent a great deal of my boyhood living with this guy.
He used to, for instance,
Anytime a circus would come within a hundred miles of St.
Paul and Minneapolis, we'd get up at four, go out, live with the circus people for three or four days.
I'd always get sick.
He didn't know when to, what to feed kids, and somehow I'd always get sick.
But Grandpa took me all over.
That's my... You were about to say something upstairs, and I said, Steve,
the kind of insight I'd like that you could share with me.
Do you remember what that was?
I don't know.
There's so much.
I guess, I think you said that Stephen's behavior became peculiar at the age of 15 or something like that.
Well, he was always an unusual youngster, but never a disobedient guy.
And he was always very close to my wife and I as a child.
And we were a little concerned about his cleanliness.
He didn't, it didn't seem to us.
He dressed quite right.
Is that an early age?
This is when he was about 14 or 15.
And so I decided to send him to a military academy.
We live out in Shoreview, which is a northern suburb of St.
Paul.
And this St.
Thomas Military Academy was right across the street from where my grandpa lived and where I was brought up, 10 miles from where my home is.
My home was in 1965.
Well, this putting him in St.
Thomas, where they wore uniforms, you know, and dressed, turned out to be a very unfortunate thing to do.
Because Stephen was a stranger there from a part of the city where other St.
Thomas
Catholic kids did not live.
And it turned out that the kids that went to St.
Thomas were very cliquish, depending upon which parish they came from in the city.
Well, Stephen had no parish in the city.
Now, you're not Catholic.
My wife is Catholic.
You're Jewish, right?
I came from a family in which half my grandparents were non-Jews and half were Jews.
So you weren't really practicing Jews at all?
Well, Grandpa was a practicing Jew, and he helped found the
synagogue in St.
Paul.
This is not really relevant.
I just think Steve did mention the Franco block in this town.
They're talking about Jewish.
And I think there was some kind of relation with either your family or the Zimmerman family.
So it's just, I kind of assume that he's talking about Jewish or it's enough to be Jewish.
If you start to get into this thing, you know, it's going to get just... No, it's not necessarily.
It's not even going to do it.
Okay.
That was just a passing question.
I married a Catholic girl.
But you're actually talking about the school.
Yeah, and he didn't have a parish, I guess.
Well, he was, in essence, alone, far from home in this place.
And he was a little bit of a kid, and virtually ignored by the other students.
And very lonely.
If you talk to him about St.
Thomas, it seems as if that's where he first became unhappy.
I had paid an older boy who had an automobile.
He was a senior at the same time.
He was driving back home, but he would either forget or ignore him.
Stephen ended up hitchhiking home every day.
Every day.
Yeah, every day after school he hitchhiked home.
Well, what he'd do, this was the days when we were beginning to build the freeway in St.
Paul, Minneapolis.
So what he'd do is on the way home, he'd see these houses which were vacant and go into them and sit there and look at a lot of them, you know, Victorian in age and so on.
And he'd look around at the different things that were in there.
He was exceedingly observant.
And it isn't just books that he collects.
He collects stained glass windows and doorknobs and all, gosh.
Was he always a collector?
Yeah, he was always a collector, even as a youngster, five or six years old.
He's always been an amazing sort of a youngster individual.
I can remember...
I used to go to a place where they sold 78 records in this town I was practicing in when Stephen was a baby in southern Minnesota, and I'd bring home some of these second-hand—the fellow had jukeboxes, and Stephen, when the records would get older, he'd just sell them for 10 or 15 cents, and I'd go in, I'd buy them, and give some to Stephen.
And after he had about 45 or 50 of them, why, you'd pick one up and you'd say, now, Stephen, what record is this?
And this was when he was four, maybe.
He hadn't learned to read yet.
And he'd be able to tell you the name of every one of those records.
And then he'd monkey around with a paper, you know, where the label was.
And sometimes pick it off and ask him, Stephen, what's the name of this record?
He says, I don't know.
The paper's all picked up.
Well, Stephen couldn't read.
He knew what the record was, but he pretended he didn't.
And this was even when he was very young.
Never did too well in school.
He was a very great kid.
A very great man.
Yeah.
Let's jump ahead.
When this thing happened in March of last year,
Well, I first learned about this in 1988.
Stephen was caught in a library out in California.
Yeah, and he hadn't taken any books, as a matter of fact.
If he had used his head at all, he wouldn't have gotten caught, because he went into this private part of the library.
He was kicked out of it by the janitor, and he thought he left his briefcase in there, which is not the case.
So he went back in to get his briefcase, and they caught him a second time, and then they called the briefcase.
That's when the whole thing started.
He didn't have any books, you know, but that's when I kind of... So when they called the FBI in on the picture, and after...
A month or six weeks or two months later, the FBI agent, one of the FBI agents in Minneapolis, started paying me visits asking me if he couldn't make arrangements through me to talk to Smith.
So I went to God, my lawyer, and I said, what should I do about this?
He said, don't do anything.
You tell the guy to contact me, which I did.
The guy spent two years trying to get me and her Dobney to make these arrangements, and I don't know what it wouldn't have been the best thing to do because it wouldn't have been all his friends.
Well, I'm not so sure.
Neither is Dobney.
I mean, with the magnitude of the thing, the magnitude of the thing speaks itself.
I mean, it's still enormous.
You sit down and remember what you said upstairs.
I guess you said that you weren't going to attend any trial.
No, I'm not going to attend any trial.
Why is that?
Well, for one thing, Dr. Logan has advised Gray that there's going to be great criticism of him.
Somehow, and it may be true, somehow my influence on Stephen has had something to do with his development.
Do you believe that?
Psychosis?
What's your position?
Well, I'm not, you know, I've been confronted with this thing off and on for 25 years, and I'm not a rationalizer.
I just don't know.
I don't know what to think.
Do you generally believe in me?
It means medical help.
Oh, there's no question.
I mean, they say this is a valid defense in your population.
It's so valid that I suggested it before anybody down here thought of it.
I convinced it was quite severe.
There you get into the problem of who is normal, you know.
If you dig down deep enough in any of us, you're going to find some
But I have a family, many of whom have had psychiatric difficulties.
So there's a history throughout the family of schizophrenic, antidepressants.
And incidentally, I have two sisters who died of
Encephalitis.
I'm not so sure that is.
How about encephalitis?
Did you get that from an insect?
No.
Well, some forms of encephalitis you get from insects.
Some you get from after the influenza.
The influenza epidemic of World War I produced a great deal of encephalitis.
Interestingly enough, I had a sister who was two years
younger than I was.
When I was six and she was four, they vaccinated the family for smallpox, and she died three days later of, apparently, vaccinia, encephalitis.
Encephalitis due to the virus that they vaccinate people for to prevent smallpox.
You know what has really impressed me
It's surprising, but I think that's what they blame me for.
And I don't see it that way.
I mean, who's they?
The psychiatry.
Some psychiatry.
I blame you for what?
For making Stephen abnormal again.
How can that be?
I don't know.
If I'd have thought it was true, there was even a psychologist once who told me, and this was many years ago in 1966, he said, you should leave your family, go out to California, start a new life for yourself, and stop hurting you.
This was said to you?
Yeah.
When?
1966.
Really?
Now, what prompted the psychiatry?
I mean, were members of your family being treated at that time?
No, my immediate family.
Well, what would prompt the man to say something like that?
Was he seeing any members of the family?
Well, we were dragged in.
See, the beginning of Stephen's court problems was instigated by me, unfortunately.
Stephen stopped in 1965.
He started not coming home for dinner.
This worried me.
Now, this is 26 years ago, so he would have been 16.
Yeah, 16.
And my mother had two detectives who used to alternate, driving her up to Moose Lake,
which is about 100 miles north of the Twin Cities, because I had a second sister who also developed encephalitis, and she developed it after influenza.
She was seven years younger than me.
She was born only after the other girl had died, but she was an invalid all her life, and she died at the age of 42 in 1969.
These two detectives used to drive my mother up there, and they almost became sort of family members, you know.
Well, when Stephen started not showing up at my day for dinner, I got a bit worried about it, and he began to be sloppier than he had previously been, and some strange
looking things about him, and then one day we get a call at the house from a, obviously a black man, asking to receive it, using an assumed name, and then a letter came from the county jail.
Well, the two detectives checked who the letter had come from, and it came from a fellow by the name of Cy Lewis, a black guy, who incidentally I, I,
developed an acquaintance with the following fall and still known.
But he was a sort of a half-baked fence and feet and so on.
He really wasn't much of a criminal.
But at the recommendations of these two cops, I took Stephen down to the
juvenile detention center and put him into it.
And the next day I went down to the juvenile court, and this guy who was the chief deputy for the judge asked me, what should we say we're arresting him for, Doc?
I said, I don't know.
What would you recommend?
Oh, he said, let's call it incorrigibility.
Well, they gave him a very thorough examination.
at that time at the Human Detention Center and came up with a diagnosis of schizophrenia.
Really?
This is in 65.
In 65.
And this required this judge, unfortunately, because of my family background in the Twin Cities, there's a lot of people who are the children of people who knew my grandpa, including this judge.
We almost got him down here to testify for Stephen, which he would have done.
But Rosenberg, this older attorney, decided he didn't feel they wanted to bother him or something.
At the last minute, he told him he didn't have to come.
But he insisted that Stephen be sent to some sort of a school in the eastern part of the United States
or someplace outside the state.
And he was talking about if there's some schools that disturb young people called the Devereaux schools.
Have you heard of that?
It's very vaguely familiar.
Well, at any rate, that's what they were looking at.
But unfortunately, after having applied for five or six of these places,
None of them were taken because they considered them too old for their programs.
So, with the turning down of all them schools, I got a bit desperate.
We'd spent months, three or four months.
Henry Jamin said he wanted another cup of coffee.
Oh, thank you.
Nick, do you want some?
No problem at all.
No problem at all?
Just black folks.
In the juvenile detention center.
The judge, I complained about this because I said he hasn't done anything.
Judge, why should he be in a detention center like this all this time?
He made me keep it in the locked section of a private hospital.
Why?
Because he was afraid that Stephen would get together with this black guy.
But why was he there in the first place?
He hadn't done anything.
Was this supposed to teach him something?
Well, the judge was just afraid he was going to get to... Why was he in a detention center in the first place?
Because I put him there.
But this was to teach him a lesson?
No, it wasn't punishment, you see.
Juvenile judges, especially this guy, have a tendency to look at all juvenile offenders as sick people.
Well, in Stephen's case, the psychiatrist advised that, yes, Stephen was sick.
Well, the judge is only...
concept of how to work with this thing was to keep him locked up so that he wouldn't gravitate to this.
That's terrible.
And you know, after something like four or five months of this stuff, when they finally let him out, in the interim during that summer, I had taken him to the manager clinic.
So he had a thorough workup at the manager clinic in 1965.
They said, too, that he was said,
Schizoid-like or schizophrenia.
What do they say now?
Is that basically the same?
Much the same.
Yeah, they call him a schizophrenic or a schizoid or something like that.
So when he finally took off and started going on the road, did you have any idea that he was traveling the country, going from city to city and place to place?
During his absences when he was on the road.
Well, there was a period there before he had a car, you see.
And he'd go down to the Skid Row areas of Minneapolis, particularly in southern St.
Paul.
Made friends there.
I got pretty adept at
getting down to these places myself, you see.
I'd make friends with the indigent down there.
I've been a kind of, as you can see, a kind of a mother hymn.
And I almost had to do it alone because my wife is not equipped for that sort of thing.
And I get lies among me, among me,
drunks and so on, you know.
Some of them became really close friends with not only Stephen, but me in those early years.
So this is not something you've just begun to do in recent years.
No.
You're finding these people from the other side.
Yeah.
And he'd bring me down because they'd get, some of them would get sick.
So he'd bring me down to see them.
He was worried.
So here his father, the doctor, would come down and take him.
What is your specialty, by the way?
Internal medicine.
Internal medicine, but I've been one of the pioneers in geriatric care in Minnesota for something like seven or eight years.
I was the chairman of the Aging Committee for the State Medical Association.
And I got interested in nursing home care and other problems with me at the elderly.
This must be a tough thing to deal with.
I mean, all this publicity and other... I'm beyond caring about that too much, but it's tough to deal with because it's so agonizing to see your son this way.
Where do you think
The books seem to be a special interest apart from... They do.
Do you have an explanation for that in your mind as to why the books particularly?
What made them the passion among passions?
Well, this kid would...
travel around the country, and he'd get a feeling in depth of the different towns that he went to.
And he was just all over the place before he was 21, usually by himself and usually in an old clunker that he'd buy.
And he'd draw pictures of the old houses, the Victorian houses.
especially the Victorian, but any old house.
And one day, he decided that he was going to take some of these pictures and send them into... There's an institution in Washington called the National Trust for Historic Preservation of the United States.
Well, he sent in some of his pictures to this thing, pictures of the old buildings.
And the editor of their quarterly journal,
wrote a letter back saying, Stephen, we'd like to reproduce these.
And they wrote an article entitled The Victorian World of Stephen Blumberg around these things.
Where was this present?
I wouldn't mind just getting a copy of that.
The National Trust of Historic Preservation is in Washington, D.C.
And I have a couple of copies.
I gave one to Nickerson.
Do you know offhand when it was published?
It seemed to me that it was 1972.
Mm-hmm.
And the other piece was The Victorian World of Stephen's Own World?
Yeah.
And that was in their periodical, right?
I mean, does he see himself as lost in a Victorian world, or is the Senator suggesting that?
Not so much lost in a Victorian world as the savior of the Victorian world.
He deplored the fact that these houses, first in St.
Paul and Minneapolis, but then all over the country in the 70s, were being knocked down by a, you know, they take a great big steel ball and just knock the houses to smithereens and everything that was in it was lost.
And he felt this was just an appalling thing, these beautiful things that he saw in the houses, these stained glass windows and so on.
So he felt that
He needed to collect these things in order to save them for posterity.
This was before the book thing got into the, but he got into the book thing, because he got interested in these towns, you see.
Yeah, he was looking for, I guess, for research material.
Yeah, and he collected books on architecture, Victorian architecture.
He collected books on the towns themselves, and in the late 70s, I used to go with him.
I figured he didn't, he usually didn't want me to go with him in those days.
Now, he feels a lot closer to me.
He wants me with him, but in those early days, he didn't.
He thought it was kind of a sissy thing for him to be with his father, so I kind of had to push him to go with him.
He took me once to Philadelphia, and there's an individual.
I don't know whether he still has the job.
This would be about 19, oh my God, this is 1972 also, 71.
There's a fellow by the name of Maas, M-A-A-S-S.
was an authority on Victorian architecture and was the architectural historian for the city of Philadelphia.
And we went to see this guy, Moss, and he wrote a book called The Gingerbread Age that Stephen had bought, and Stephen had started to correspond with him.
And I can remember we had lunch with him.
Stephen's drawings, and I asked him, I said, what do you think of these drawings?
And Ma says, well, that's just the way I started out.
The kid has got the potential for being, and if you spend the time out of it and have the desire, he could be really quite an artist.
Well, I asked him yesterday, you know, I said, no, you're still a young man.
Regardless how this thing comes out, win or lose, I said, you know,
Well, hopefully, you'll be rehabilitated.
You've still got a life ahead of you, you know?
I mean, have you ever thought of being an architect, or, you know?
And he didn't really respond to that, but it would be nice to know what his goals are when this is over, and I don't know if they are, you know, at the moment.
He needs a role model, I think, and I'm so different.
you know, a plotting, scientific mind.
That's why I got into medical school.
They look for obsessive, compulsive people like me in the medical aptitude tests.
They're designed to catch people who are plotters, look for the minutiae to remember, and
I tend to memorize things, I think.
But you say you're compulsive in another way?
I mean, do you think this is something he acquired from you?
Well, I'm certainly compulsive.
I think all internists, I've heard some of my psychiatrist friends tell me that all internists are obsessive compulsive people.
But I'm not at all compulsive like he is.
my associates.
Yes, I haven't been in practice in fifteen years, but— Why haven't you?
No.
This grandfather of mine left an unbelievably complicated estate of real estate holdings.
all over the place and all kinds of stuff.
And around about 1975, all of a sudden, enough of this became valuable.
So that I... Well, it required your attention.
To be honest, the real reason I quit practice was Stephen.
I... He'd get into minor problems just all over the place.
He'd be caught in old buildings.
and the little things that happened here and there.
I just didn't feel right about what I was doing to the patients.
So I retired from practice.
I didn't need to practice because of the real estate.
So there was another source of income.
Yeah.
Did you feel helpless at all, Stephen?
I mean, was there a sense of...
helplessness, I guess.
Paddling for all I was worth just to keep my nose above water for years.
Agony.
I don't know how I'd survive.
Sometimes I wonder.
Something like this then was not totally unexpected then.
You mean this last thing?
The circumstance he finds himself in now.
Well, he had never
which was really criminal up to this.
And I was not aware of it.
I mean, it was ongoing for 20 years, apparently.
Yeah, but this was going into old, abandoned houses.
No, I mean that, but I mean the books, apparently.
Yeah, and I didn't know.
See, he'd buy a lot of books.
Of these 20,000 books,
Probably 19,000 he purchased.
Well, that's what he said.
He indicated yesterday.
He said, you know, a lot of reason mine.
They're genuinely mine, he said.
The thing that most people, I don't think, realize is that virtually every estate sale, the Salvation Army, the libraries have bargain sales all the time, and what most people pick up
not the real old stuff.
And so you can pick up books for practically nothing anyplace.
And it continues to this day.
I guess, you know, one element is that Stephen has had needs, you know, at the barest minimum.
Isn't that something, though?
You know, and I don't want to estimate how much he has had access to, but I mean, it's been estimated anywhere from $50,000 to $70,000 a year.
Well, see, my...
My mother, when she died, left three trusts—one for me, one for my brother, one for my sister.
I took my share of the trust because I didn't need it.
Every year, I'd give half of it to Stephen and half of it to my daughter.
And then, on top of that, we had a—we had and have an apartment complex in St.
Paul that my brother and sister and I built.
My brother has a son who's an attorney down in Houston, Texas, and he said, you ought to put that into a limited partnership and give it to us kids, and we did that.
I gave my share to Stephen and my daughter.
So he comes from the apartment house and he gets the app of my share of my mother's.
What would you estimate?
It's $70,000.
Does he use it every year?
He spends it all on whatever he buys, you know.
I mean, not on clothing.
Oh, hell, he doesn't eat.
I, I, I, for the past 10 years, 15 years, I've had him bring in all the receipts when he's on the road.
so that I could make out an income tax for him and report his sales and so on.
And he'd go to flea markets and he'd sell this junk that he's collected over the past 25 years.
And I'd keep all these records and then I'd put them in a book chronologically.
I could pretty well tell by the receipts, you see,
how much he was spending for food and it was pitiful.
He was spending less for food in a week than an ordinary person would spend in a day.
I don't know, I think he ate mostly junk food and candy bars.
Whatever, you know, we had two meals together yesterday.
You know, we had an old meal, which is not much.
Yeah.
and he really seeks out.
The most fruitful place that you can occupy.
Yeah.
The likable guy.
Tell me about your perfection for him.
Oh, I have, I don't know, my, I almost adore both him and my daughter, and I think he,
The adoration is reciprocated.
If you'd ask either one of them, I think they'd tell you that.
They just idolize me, and I don't know why.
People who are close to me, I guess, do tend to be that way.
I have some kind of effect where people who don't know me don't like me, and people who do know me.
Well, where did this other person come up with this?
I was suggesting we should go to California and it's about over.
Well, the psychiatrists have some... See, this would never be if it were a psychiatrist who was a friend of mine, and some psychiatrists who were friends of mine have taken care of Stephen.
There would never be any criticism of him.
But psychiatrists who didn't know me, and through the court mess, when he got into the hands of some of these
They were just criticized the hell out of me.
And I don't know, it may be that I was, I had a great deal of guilt feeling about this originally, putting him in that juvenile intentional mess.
I thought, my God, what have you done to your son, you know?
And I think I was very defensive in 1965 and 1966, and that may have had something to do.
You think maybe that was an act of frustration in your part?
to put him in there.
I was simply taking the advice of these two guys who I knew very well, and I thought they knew what they were talking about, but I didn't realize that the upshot would be what it was.
What, to your mind, is the greatest tragedy about this?
Is there one?
In Stephen?
Oh, I think that, uh, to me, uh, the pain that this has inflicted on my wife, myself, uh,
to a lesser degree, perhaps, to these kids and so on, is something that I look at with a great deal of sadness.
It's been terrible for me, but I no longer feel any guilt about it because I didn't know anything about the book situation.
the library security.
He came with a complete surprise.
He hit it completely.
So, I mean, I was in the warehouse down in a tunnel yesterday.
That's an enormous silver thing that you can't believe.
Really?
And this is just a fraction I make at this time.
Yeah, he's got...
two places up in the cities like that.
That hasn't got so much in it.
Yeah.
He had a fascination for Texas, I guess.
Well, that's where the market for... Yeah, you see, they didn't have enough of a history down there to have these things, and we'd go all that distance, and stuff that was humdrum up in St.
Paul and Indianapolis with the collector's items down there.
Then he'd sell them usually for half of what most people got for them down there.
Most of his customers were antique dealers.
Did you think he had a pretty good dinner store?
I mean, did he do all right?
Did he make money out of it, you think?
Well, he'd collect about $25,000, $30,000, but he'd spend it on the cost of storage,
and automobile breakdowns and what have you, and pretty much eat up whatever you need.
Plus the fact that he'd take this money that he'd get.
I'd kept his bank accounts for him.
Did he just issue checks out of the account?
How did he get the money?
When he'd be, when he'd be up in Minneapolis where he'd go to the bank and cash a check.
But a lot of times I'd send him the money.
Why are there money down?
I think he would call and ask him to do it.
Henry, I mean, Fort Worth, please send me $1,500.
So he really never needed for money.
How long has he had access to this trust?
Well,
I started giving it to him in 1976.
So, if this defense is successful, what will happen?
Well, I think that what will happen is this.
If I knew more about courts, especially federal courts, I could tell better.
But what I've been looking for, and I have, you know, medical colleagues here, there, in every place.
I have, for instance, a close friend who's on the staff at the Mayo Clinic.
And I have...
The son of my medical school closest friend who was long dead is the chief psychiatrist at Walter Reed Hospital in Washington.
So I've been kind of feeling these fellows out.
What do you think we could find for Stephen and this Dr. Logan as well?
If we get to this point where we know we can do it,
My idea would be that he should be put into an environment where he has psychiatric care and at the same time can get his life in shape.
I mean, you expect that he would have to be committed to something like that, and this wouldn't be where he'd be able to come at all.
I suspect he'll be committed for it.
I talk to my psychiatric friends, and I get a lot of different estimates, but I suspect that they won't keep him very long.
Really?
Yeah.
I mean, I would hope that, you know, he doesn't go and resume this activity then.
Well, the thing is, he needs to be in a set environment in which he works with people.
One of the things I've been thinking is if he could get in there is there was some fellow that raised him contacting who was a head of a librarian's security facilities.
And if he could get in with this guy, help him with taking care of the libraries
using his understanding of what's wrong with their security system, helping him fix it up, and at the same time see a private psychiatrist on the outside.
That would be my idea.
And I would think on a worst case, if he's convicted, it would be worth requesting the court to have him assign the task of helping
find the places where these things belong.
You know what I'm saying?
He knows where every book came from.
Yeah, he should do that, too.
He'd like to do that.
The thing is, Stephen wouldn't steal a penny from somebody new.
I've seen him.
He's one day found an envelope in this building in Minneapolis where he has his stuff.
In the same block, there was the headquarters.
We had the DFL party up to the Democratic primary labor party, and they had their state offices at that time in one of the buildings in the block.
And one day, he's going up and down the alley, and he finds an envelope with $500 in cash with the DFL on the envelope.
He goes in and reports it and takes it in.
He's got to put it in his pocket.
The first windows he sold, I took them down to my hospital, and I figured the doctors would get a kind of a kick out of this, so I took two, three, or four of them down and set them up, and a couple of friends of mine said, you know, those are pretty.
I'm doing a house up in this area.
You don't suppose Stephen would mind if I came and bought something?
So he came over, and that was the first windows he sold.
And then another doctor came over.
And the first doctor, his children grew up.
He moved from the big house to a townhouse.
This was about four years ago.
So he wanted more windows from Stephen.
Well, Stephen, who never charged
as much as most people do for windows anyhow.
And many of these he did for 20 years, by the way.
He figured out that he charged Dr. Huesby $75 too much, so he sent six a letter saying, I got $75 too much for everything.
He wouldn't cheat.
Somebody knew about anything.
Just almost... Yeah, he's a gentle kid.
Would you say?
Oh, yeah.
I mean, there are unquestioned elements of warmth in him, too.
But when you said that somebody had diagnosed schizophrenia, what was the other side that they saw?
Well, the way the fellow at the Mayo Clinic, or at the Menager Clinic at that point, described him,
He said he goes into these old places with the cobwebs and the dirt and the dust, and he claims he sees beauty.
He says, no, that's unrealistic.
All there is is dirt and dust.
And cobwebs.
And these people that he takes, there's probably an extension of that.
I mean, the house that he took me to yesterday, he just put this around.
I'll run back on again now.
Okay, I'm sorry.
I've been enough around these people from the other side of life, from you and I, to know that there's a tremendous amount of need for affection and even love.
They were nice people.
They were not taking anything away from the people.
They certainly deserved
our compassion, you know.
Anyway, I want to make that clear.
I didn't mean things were bad people at all.
He introduced you to Jimmy Hall down in Otumwet, and what a character.
You know, Jimmy and his wife had a dreadful rooming house in the very worst partisan scenario.
And I don't know how Stephen got there to begin with, but he started
And when he'd go through Cincinnati, he started renting a room up there.
And Jimmy's wife, who was about four or five years older than me, just simply adored Stephen.
She'd call me up about, oh, once a month or something like that.
How is my boy after going there again?
You know, and I'd go there, and he'd take me up to sleep in those rooms, and I smelled of urine, and I'd find an excuse after a night or two of going someplace else.
But... You actually would spend the night?
Oh, sure.
Yeah, I didn't want to hurt their feelings.
They were so... How old was that man, by the way?
Jimmy is 75.
My God, no, my father is 79.
This guy looked like he was at his age.
Well, he's... He's dissipated, I guess.
Well, he drinks too much, yeah.
Well, he's a little squashy, I think, too.
From alcohol, yeah.
But he never did.
He would love that he called him Mr. Hall.
I mean, Mr. Hall doesn't call him Jimmy.
Yeah.
Well, Mrs. Hall called him Jimmy, and she was more intelligent than me, although... He loves it down there.
He thinks he can stay there forever.
Well, it was my idea to move him into that house.
It was my idea for Stephen to buy that house.
Had you ever seen it?
Would it have all the books in it?
Had you ever been down there?
I never went upstairs to look at the books.
He had books up in Minneapolis, but I don't think he had all of them up there.
But you wouldn't have known inculables and inculables?
He wouldn't have known that one of these books may be worth $50,000 or $100,000.
I looked at the books up at Minneapolis before he moved them down there many times, you know.
And what would attract my attention is some book about old Minneapolis or even old Boston or something like that.
Of course, he was able to suspect that he was
making midnight rubs to libraries.
I didn't have any faintest idea about that.
But this guy, Rhodes, now this is an interesting thing.
We knew this guy for 15 years, and I saw Rhodes on several occasions during those 15 years at odd intervals, always up in Minneapolis.
I never traveled anyplace with Rhodes, nor did I go to Detroit ever.
When Rhodes was with me, he'd treat me... You know David Copperfield and this Uriah keeper, that self-effacement of Uriah.
He'd sort of treat me that way.
And almost every conversation I'd have with him, it seems to me, at least as I recall him now,
He'd complain about his back and he claimed he had a dislocated disc in his back and he needed Percodan, which is a strong morphine-like drug, which he'd take, I guess, quite a bit of for his back.
And the conversation usually would center around Kenny and his medical
condition.
And it was always sort of self-effacing.
I never looked at this guy as a criminal at all.
I never saw the, uh, and yet he must be the worst scoundrel that Steve has ever known.
I was about to tell you, I saw him briefly on a tablet, and I didn't finish telling him, but I said, okay, and I said, you know, I'm going to write about you.
I'd like to ask you a few questions.
And I said, you know, I'll be doing the record, so I mean, I can, I said, but, uh,
this is a trick, you know, I mean, it's not a trick, it's a device.
And I said, of course, if you don't talk to me, I said, I'm just going to have to depend on your testimony.
And I said, quite frankly, if that's the case, I said, you look like a pretty bad guy in that testimony.
You look to me straight and I said, I am a bad guy.
I said, I shiver on my spine.
I was looking into the face of evil when he said that.
He said, I am a bad guy.
I said, you know, you've got it right.
See you later.
You know, and I left and I wrote that down.
I will lose that.
He's a contemptible guy.
I'm not trying to excuse in any way what Stephen did.
And I told him that.
I said, Stephen, that's irrelevant.
You know, what you did was wrong.
And I would hope that you never do something like this again.
And you make every effort to rehabilitate yourself.
Yeah.
I said, but that man set you up.
He strung you along.
He came in to sell you out.
What amazes me is that he waited so long.
But then I think he was waiting to make a good score on it.
I guess he saw this as his ace in the hole.
Until the day he needed it, he had somebody he could sell out.
Because apparently he was in trouble for other things.
This guy has a record a mile long and all expunged because he's been a paid informant.
Yeah, a paid informer for 18 years.
For close to $200,000.
Yeah.
He raped Stephen's place down in the tunnel and the thing is empty.
And you can see it when you go to the warehouse, because you couldn't get into the warehouse.
That stuff's all still there.
The house was raped.
There's nothing there.
There's nothing left in that house.
And most of it this guy took.
Took it all.
Yeah.
And the FBI found him.
And he stole $6,000 from Jimmy Hall.
Yeah.
And Jimmy, like a fool, gave him a combination to the same.
No.
It's not funny, I'm sorry.
Kenny could fool you, though.
I thought he was the nicest man I ever met.
He treated me so nice.
Setting him up.
What can I say?
If you see a guy who really looks like a crook,
I liked this Cy Rulish, you know, this black guy at the beginning there.
Cy, at a certain point in time, Stephen was living over with a University of Minnesota student who was studying to be a probation officer.
And this guy got to meet Cy, and then he went and he told us,
prospective boss that he'd met him.
And I got the guy who almost hit the ceiling called me up and told me.
And I decided, well, if they can't keep him away from Cy, maybe I can.
So I had this student bring him over to my office.
And I said, now, Cy, I want you to know that I've been asked to prefer charges against you, but I wouldn't do it.
Because in all honesty, I could not see that you've done anything to Steve.
But here's what I want you to do.
I want you to protect Steve.
Instead of doing him harm, you protect him, and you protect him by keeping in contact with me.
This guy never let me down.
He looks like, you know, a shiftless stare, but he's got honor.
Three years ago, he had a heart attack.
Took him down to the city hospital.
So I wouldn't let him touch him until he called me.
This guy, you can trust, you see.
He looks like a crook, this kid.
It's been an education for you, hasn't it?
Oh, man.
Such as you never would have expected.
Oh, yeah.
Have you got a reflection on that?
Well, I've been through so much, you know, after all.
42 months, I was a front-line doctor in both the South Pacific and under general patent for the European Union.
I saw a lot of—there's guys I still know that I picked up where they got hit.
And doctoring you meet an awful lot of different types of people.
especially in your residencies and internships and so on.
So I've had a lot of experience with the run-of-the-mill people all over the place.
But this thing here, that was easy because it was objective.
This has been terrible because I'm personally involved in it.
And you don't know how it's going to end yet, either?
No.
Where did you go to med school, by the way?
Northwestern.
Uh-huh.
Chicago.
Okay.
And did you tell me how old you are?
73.
They're probably wondering what we're doing, so I think I got an hour.
You got about all you can handle with me.
Is there anything else you think I should know about this that you can think of?
Oh, I could think of a million things that I don't think of.
Do you think I got the most salient observations?
If I would understand one thing about Stephen, what should I understand?
He's an extremely lovable, extremely affectionate, caring individual who feels inadequate
but actually is far brighter than the people around me.
And brighter than people like me who, while I'm no dummy, I don't have his insights into aesthetic things like he does.
And I think he feels a little lost because other people don't, most people don't have this
Aesthetic feeling.
Very sensitivity, you may call it.
Yeah.
Do you love him?
Oh, very much.
We're very close.
I love the daughter, too, though.
What's your daughter's name?
Mary and I named her after this little girl that died when I was 16 years old.
Wish you the best of luck with it, Doctor.
Thank you.
They better go back upstairs before they went to her head in the house.
It's been really an agonizing sort of thing.
Sometimes I've wondered how I've survived.
It's been tough.
You were quoted in some of the papers, and maybe when this story broke on the wires, I remember you were being very honest with some of the newspapers, too honest.
You said, well, my son's always been an oddball.
Was that a direct quote?
I mean, was that a correct quote?
That was a correct quote.
How did you feel when you said that?
Were you upset and angry, or was that just the truth?
Well, I had to, I felt as if I had to, in some way, counteract the impressions that the FBI were making, that he was a master thief, and to, in common vernacular, advise them that instead of that, he was an eccentric,
psychiatrically disturbed individual who needs help and has never hurt anybody.
I think that's very important.
This is not, there's no violence involved in this matter.